note groups are a great way to create custom blocks of nodes in
a very clearly readable way and make them easily and flexibly reusable.
They also extend the shader editor for the ability to change multiple instances
of the same notes set up in multiple places of the notary.
A great deal in achieving an efficient workflow.
Is having a custom database of note groups for functionalities that you use a lot,
but would take a while to set up each time.
We already talked about the methods to
parameter is a shader into sensible parameters,
which is a very important base to create useful note groups
that are easy to control and reusable and multiple different situations.
In this part,
I want to talk about how to use a sensible set
of control parameters that provide flexible control over a note set up
and set it up as a user friendly node group.
A note group at the end of the day is just a module, a tool to be used by an artist,
whether that user maybe Hugh yourself a colleague or a customer.
In any case,
it is important to design the user interaction with that tool in an intuitive way and
expose all the essential functionality for the user
to easily adapt how the note group behaves.
So a large part of designing I know well is defining a sensible permit realization,
which is what I talked about in the previous video,
but that is not all of what a good note group should provide.
Just as important as a good privatization
that is defined with the inputs of the note group.
Are the outputs that it returns
depending on the functionality of a note group,
you can have a variety of different types of output maps.
Usually you have a main output that is defined by the notes main functionality,
but a lot of the time it is incredibly
useful to include an additional set of secondary outputs,
just as with the input,
there should be no redundant information though.
If one output map can just as well be drawn
out of the information of another with simple means,
then it is sometimes better to just include
the map that provides the more valuable information.
For example, for a cell based texture,
a sell position output provides more information than a random value per cell
as this can be easily retrieved from the sell position with a white noise.
The other way around is not possible though.
So in this case the random value output could simply be left out.
On the other hand,
a random value map has a lot of use cases
and can simply be included to be more user friendly.
That is your choice to make in this case
something though that has without a doubt more information than a random value
is a random color
as it provides three random values in one output.
Let's for a moment get back to the input information the user gifts to the note group.
When a note trees collapsed into a note group.
Some of the access to additional functionality that has not specifically been
parameter prized as input parameters is cut off from the user.
So additionally to the main functionality of the Shader set up,
you might also want to expose some secondary functionality for optional tweaking.
Working with note groups,
it is crucial to understand that all parameters that are not exposed as
the group inputs are chosen within the note group and not over rideable.
One of the main ideas of using note groups is that you can use them multiple
times in a note set up as a separate instances of the same note group.
Every instance of the note group uses the exact same internal
notes setup but can be driven by different input parameters.
All the parameters exposed in the note group interface can be
chosen separately for each individual instance of the note group.
In the shader,
you can simply create an instance of a note group by
selecting it from the ad menu or duplicating another group.
Note
with instance Sing,
you have to be carefully aware of which parameters
are exposed to the inputs and those are set individually
for each instance of the note group and which
are globally controlled from within the note group itself.
They still can also be used to create a blend file wide control of parameters.
You can just outsource the global control parameters into
a note group that simply provides these as outputs.
And then this note group can be used in multiple places
in the military but the parameter is always the same.
But not every note group has to be intended
to be directly interacted with by the user.
Another very important utility of note groups is to nest them within one another.
For example,
is it a valid option to create an elaborate master
node group that includes an extensive amount of input parameters
and then trim those down by nesting it
in another note group that simplifies the interface
by using a smaller subset of parameters
and is intended for a more specific use case.
I want to quickly mention another specific
use case of nesting and instances note groups
a way to expose not only single values but whole parts of the notes set up to
a user is to use another note group and using instances of it in the main setup.
The functionality of this helper.
Note group can then be adapted by the user,
which changes every instance where the setup is used at the same time.
I like to use this for example to control the
functionality of multiple RGB curves in the same place.
But of course nesting can also just be used for less
specific use cases for a convoluted but organized notary structure.
Note groups are generally a great organization tool to
structure your no tree in a modular way.
So let's just grab the notes set up of the parametric bubble wrap that I
showed you in the previous video and set it up as a note group.
I could make the full materially note group with a shader output but instead I want
to create a note group from the base texture setup that is used by the material.
As the first step, you can simply select all the notes that are part of the setup.
That is supposed to be the note group
in this case, that is this part of the notary.
I recommend you to parameter rise the notary beforehand.
So you can have an exact idea of what the inputs are going to be.
Make sure that you don't include the input
parameters in your selection and then simply group the
notes by pressing control plus G make sure to give it a proper name as well.
Depending on the simplicity of the use case,
that might already be enough.
But most of the time you should take some additional steps
to make the note group well accessible and user friendly.
So let's go over the different steps of customization because
of the way the notes set up was used.
The note group already created the necessary inputs and outputs
but these might not be in the right order.
So you can simply go into the notes section of the properties tab
and order the inputs and outputs how you want them.
But first it is necessary to name them accordingly. So you know which one is which
Now that the needed inputs and outputs are all correctly organized.
I wanted to find some additional outputs
even though they are not needed in this specific notes set up.
I want to output also the vector maps of the sell
position and sell you vis which the texture is created with.
These might be useful for the setup in another use case
and on top of that the whole random output color from
the white noise that I am already using in the setup.
One of the main customization methods that you can use to adapt
the interface of the note groups is specifying the type of input.
The inputs that are automatically use when you're creating a note group are
based on the type of socket it is connected to on the inside
and in most cases that is exactly what you want.
But on the output for the mosque we run into an issue here.
The socket of the output is generated as a color socket.
This type is misleading though, as the information is a simple value mask.
So to fix that,
I simply create a new value output by dragging a value connection
to the group output and then reconnected with the right map.
The unused output can then be deleted by pressing the X next to the name field.
But apart from the main types of data that the sockets used for values,
there are also different types of interface controls.
There's the regular value slider that shows arrows
on the sides when you hover over it
and then there is the slider that shows a
blue bar as the value approaches its maximum.
This difference is only visual and the different inputs can be
created connecting two sockets that already use this specific type.
It is important to communicate the uses of
the input parameters as clearly as possible.
So here, for example,
I want to communicate better than the high
random height has a hard minimum and maximum.
And so I create a new input by connecting it to for example,
factor input of the mixed Rgb.
Note, then I rename
reconnect
and delete the replaced input.
The only other difference in input interface exists for vectors
additionally to the regular vector input that gives you the three value sliders,
there's also an optional normal input as a sphere.
In top down view with that you can specify the direction of
a vector with a length of one by rotating the sphere around.
This type of input can be found in the normal note of the vector category.
In the last video I already talked about how useful it is to be
able to control the behavior of inputs with the use of note groups.
You can go even a step further and define the restrictions and default values.
So for every input you can specify the value that it takes by the fault.
For a new instance of the same note group.
When the input is created,
the fault is automatically set to the value of
the socket is connected to on the inside,
but you can always change it in the note properties.
Then you can also define the limits of the
value input with a maximum and minimum value.
The limits can still be ignored though by punching and direct values.
So if you want to truly limit the input, you have to use a clamp note on top.
Also you can hide the direct control options in the interface of the note group.
This feature should be used whenever an input is intended to
be only driven by another map and not a constant value.
For example, when the input is meant to be a coordinate map,
there is no usual use case where you would want to define a single coordinate
and when you hide the value controls,
the interface gets a little bit less cluttered
and also the input reads more clearly as being meant to be driven with another map.
But that brings us to a problem. If an input that is intended to be used with input maps
is left empty,
there is no map to work with
and the default value can only provide a singular constant value.
So in cases like this one, when you want to assign an input with a default map,
that is used when the input is left empty,
there is still a way to do this.
It is a work around But in the case of using this method for the coordinate map,
it comes with no drawbacks.
You can simply take a vector note said to length and
then compare the length of the input map to zero.
Using a greater than note,
this returns a one whenever the input is not zero and a zero when it is exactly zero,
which is the case when nothing is plugged in due to the default value.
However, when something is plugged into the input,
it only returns a zero in the exact spot where the map has the absolute value of zero.
For usual coordinate maps, like object or generated,
this point is infinitesimally small and thus does not contribute to the mosque.
So if you simply use this greater than mask to
mix between the cornet input and a default coordinate map,
for example, the generated coordinates,
It works perfectly only using the default coordinate map
whenever there is no external input plugged in.